Deep Dive: Know Your City — A Guide to Jefferson
City and Cole County Local Government. Welcome to a deep
dive episode. Today we're doing something a little different. Instead
of covering the daily news, we're building a foundation —
a comprehensive guide to the local government, economy, and civic
life of Jefferson City and Cole County, Missouri. If you
live here and you've ever wondered who's actually making decisions
about your roads, your water, your property taxes, and your
schools — this episode is for you. And a quick
note before we begin: Jefferson City is the state capital,
which means a lot of news sounds local but is
really about statewide politics. This episode is exclusively about local
government — city council, county commission, school board, and the
people and projects that directly affect daily life in Jeff
City. Let's start with the big picture. Chapter one. The
City at a Glance. Jefferson City has a population of
roughly forty-two thousand five hundred people. Cole County as a
whole is about seventy-seven thousand three hundred. The broader metro
area, which includes Callaway, Moniteau, and Osage counties, is around
a hundred and fifty thousand. Here's the thing that might
surprise you: the city isn't really growing. Population has been
essentially flat, actually declining slightly from about forty-three thousand two
hundred in the twenty-twenty census to around forty-two thousand five
hundred today. Cole County grew about eight percent over the
twenty years between two thousand and twenty-twenty, but that growth
has stalled in recent years. The mayor has set a
goal of reaching fifty thousand residents. Getting there would require
three to five thousand new housing units over the next
decade. And housing, as we'll discuss later, is one of
the city's biggest challenges. The economy here is dominated by
state government. Twenty-eight thousand government jobs exist in Jefferson City,
with roughly seventeen thousand of those in Missouri state government.
That makes the state by far the largest employer. Beyond
that, the economy includes banking — Central Bancompany and Hawthorn
Bancshares are both headquartered here — healthcare through Capital Region
Medical Center, and manufacturing with companies like Unilever and Hitachi
Energy. The cost of living is genuinely low. Overall, it's
about seven percent below the national average. Housing is twenty-two
percent below average, with a median home sale price around
two hundred and thirty thousand dollars. Average rent is just
five hundred and sixty-three dollars a month, which is sixty-four
percent below the national average. Those are striking numbers. Chapter
two. How the City Government Works. Jefferson City operates under
a mayor-council form of government with a city administrator who
handles day-to-day operations. The mayor is Ron L. Fitzwater. He's
nonpartisan, took office on April seventeenth, twenty twenty-three, and his
term runs through twenty twenty-seven. As chief executive, Fitzwater proposes
the budget, signs legislation, appoints department directors and board members,
and casts tie-breaking votes on the city council. You can
reach his office at five-seven-three, six-three-four, six-three-oh-three. The city administrator
is Brian Crane. He's a Jefferson City native, a Helias
Catholic grad, with nineteen-plus years in municipal management including stints
in Moberly and Holts Summit. Crane has a bachelor's in
political science from Lincoln University and an M-B-A from William
Woods. He's an I-C-M-A credentialed manager. His job is to
run the machinery of city government — administering all city
affairs, coordinating departments, and managing most city employees. Now, the
city council. This is where most of the legislative action
happens. The council has ten members — two per ward
across five wards — serving staggered two-year terms. There's a
term limit of four consecutive terms, after which you have
to sit out one election cycle. Here's the current lineup.
In Ward One, Randy Hoselton, whose term expires in twenty
twenty-six, and Jeff Ahlers, expiring twenty twenty-seven. Ward Two has
Mike Lester, expiring twenty twenty-six, and one vacant seat for
the twenty twenty-seven term. Ward Three is Treaka Young, twenty
twenty-six, and Derek Thomas, twenty twenty-seven. Ward Four has Chris
Leuckel, twenty twenty-six, and Julie Allen, twenty twenty-seven. And Ward
Five is Mackenzie Job, twenty twenty-six, and Shane Kampeter, twenty
twenty-seven. Five seats — one per ward — expire this
year, which means the April twenty twenty-six elections could meaningfully
reshape the council. The council meets on the first and
third Monday of each month. Pre-meeting discussion starts at five
forty-five P-M, and the official meeting begins at six P-M.
Everything happens at the John G. Christy Municipal Building at
three-twenty East McCarty Street. Meetings are open to the public,
and video recordings are posted online at the city website,
jefferson city M-O dot gov. The city's approved budget for
the current year is eighty-six point eight million dollars. Key
city departments include police, fire, public works, streets, transit —
that's Jeff Tran — wastewater, parks and recreation, planning and
zoning, and the city clerk's office. Chapter three. How Cole
County Government Works. Cole County operates under a three-member county
commission, which is standard under Missouri law. The presiding commissioner
is Sam Bushman, who serves the entire county. The eastern
district commissioner is Jeff Hoelscher, and the western district commissioner
is Harry Otto. The commission meets on Tuesdays at nine
A-M at three-eleven East High Street. Meeting agendas and video
recordings are available through the county website at cole county
dot org. Beyond the commission, there are ten elected county
officials you should know about. Tim Theroff is the county
assessor — and he's new, having taken over in September
twenty twenty-five, which we'll get into. Jay Moore is the
county auditor. Mark Eichholz is the circuit clerk. Larry Vincent
is the collector of revenue. Steve Korsmeyer is the county
clerk, who also handles election supervision and voter registration. Locke
Thompson is the prosecuting attorney. Ralph Jobe is the public
administrator. Judy Ridgeway is the recorder of deeds. John P.
Wheeler is the sheriff. And Eric Peters is the treasurer.
The county runs eighteen departments covering everything from E-M-S —
which responds to over ten thousand calls per year —
to the health department, public works, GIS mapping, and emergency
management. Financially, the county's twenty twenty-six operating budget is sixty-four
point four million dollars, with operating expenses of sixty point
one million, leaving a modest surplus of four point three
million. On top of that, thirty-two point eight million was
approved for capital improvements. The county had fifty-six point four
million in reserves at the end of twenty twenty-five. But
the financial picture isn't entirely rosy. Capital improvement sales tax
revenue underperformed — the county projected two percent growth but
only saw zero point six percent. COVID stimulus funds have
been fully depleted. County Auditor Jay Moore has warned that
revenues are, quote, getting tighter, and the county needs to
watch spending carefully in twenty twenty-six. Chapter four. Jefferson City
Public Schools. The school district serves about eight thousand five
hundred sixty students across eighteen schools: one early childhood center,
eleven elementary schools, two middle schools, two high schools —
Jefferson City High School and Capital City High School —
one alternative school, and Nichols Career Center. The district covers
two hundred twenty-three square miles across both Cole and Callaway
counties. Student demographics are about sixty-one percent white, twenty percent
African American, seven percent Hispanic, two percent Asian, and ten
percent multiracial. Per-student spending is twelve thousand one hundred eighty-two
dollars annually. The school board has seven elected volunteer members
serving three-year terms. Anne Bloemke-Warren is president, Ken Hussey is
vice president, and Brad Bates is treasurer. The board meets
monthly at the JCPS Education Offices on Dix Road. Academically,
the district has been on an encouraging trajectory. Composite scores
have improved for three consecutive years — from seventy-one percent
in twenty twenty-two to seventy-seven percent in twenty twenty-three to
eighty-four percent in twenty twenty-four. The latest figure is eighty-three
point two percent. Jefferson City High School is ranked number
one in the metro area and number fifty-eight statewide. On
the capital side, the district has been busy. A twenty
seventeen bond issue, Prop J, funded Capital City High School,
which opened in fall twenty nineteen, and renovated Jefferson City
High School. An eighty-five million dollar bond in April twenty
twenty-two is funding a new early childhood center, technology upgrades
across all schools, and renovations at both middle schools. And
right now, a twenty million dollar athletic facilities expansion is
underway — tennis complex, baseball, softball, and soccer fields —
expected to run from spring twenty twenty-six through summer twenty
twenty-seven. Three school board seats expire in twenty twenty-six, so
those elections are also coming up. Chapter five. The Big
Issues. Let's talk about the persistent challenges that have shaped
this community over the last decade. First, the twenty nineteen
tornado. On May twenty-second, twenty nineteen, an E-F-three tornado with
one hundred sixty mile per hour winds cut a thirty-two
mile path through central Missouri and directly through Jefferson City.
Five hundred sixteen homes were damaged. Eighty government buildings were
hit. Eighty-two businesses were affected. Insurance claims totaled one hundred
seventy million dollars. About a hundred and fifty housing units
were destroyed. Thirty-three people were injured, though remarkably, no one
was killed. At the five-year anniversary in twenty twenty-four, rebuilding
was still underway. Twelve buildings still needed to be torn
down two years after the storm. The tornado's damage to
the housing stock is still felt today — it worsened
what was already a tight market and fundamentally reshaped development
patterns in parts of the city. Which brings us to
the housing crisis. A twenty twenty-two needs assessment officially declared
Jefferson City in a housing crisis. After the tornado, the
city was ranked the twelfth tightest housing market in the
nation by the National Association of Realtors. The most acute
shortage is in affordable rental housing. The city has responded
with a developer incentive program offering five thousand dollars per
new unit, and the C-M-C-A is building a forty-unit affordable
apartment complex called Stronghold Landing, expected to open in summer
twenty twenty-six. But the gap between supply and demand remains
enormous. Then there's infrastructure. The High Street Viaduct is the
current poster child for this problem. Built in nineteen forty-nine,
it was emergency-closed in February twenty twenty-six after structural deterioration
was discovered — a large hole with deteriorated concrete and
steel. A temporary repair costing about thirty-four thousand dollars is
being done to reopen it, but the long-term replacement is
estimated at sixteen to eighteen million dollars, potentially up to
twenty-five million if a second bridge to Deborah Cooper Park
is included. The city has applied for a federal BUILD
grant of up to twenty-five million. The county commission voted
to support that application. But the viaduct is just one
example. Aging water and sewer systems, roads, and bridges across
the city and county all need significant investment. Water rates
are increasing four point seven five percent annually through twenty
twenty-nine just to maintain the system. Flooding is another recurring
concern. The Great Flood of nineteen ninety-three set the benchmark
— the Missouri River stayed above flood stage for sixty-two
days and crested at thirty-eight point six feet. The twenty
nineteen flood reached thirty-three point four feet. The Capital View
levee and ongoing flood management remain critical infrastructure. Crime has
also been a persistent issue. The city's crime rate runs
at twenty-four per one thousand residents, which is above the
national average. There's significant geographic variation — southwest neighborhoods are
the safest, while northeast neighborhoods have the highest rates. Violent
crime increased twenty-two percent in recent reporting. The city council
is examining the quarter-cent public safety sales tax as budget
pressures mount. And finally, the property tax assessment debacle. In
twenty twenty-five, Cole County Assessor Chris Estes received a failing
grade from the Missouri State Tax Commission. He hadn't completed
the required countywide reassessment every two years, citing staff shortages
and software problems. His workaround — assessing half the county
in twenty twenty-three and the other half in twenty twenty-five
— was non-compliant and created deeply inequitable tax increases: thirteen
percent for some homeowners, six to seven percent for others.
Estes retired at the end of August twenty twenty-five, and
Tim Theroff took over on September first. The county is
still working toward compliance, and the equity concerns haven't been
fully resolved. Chapter six. Policy Shifts and What's Changing. A
few significant policy shifts are worth understanding. The capital improvement
sales tax, originally approved in nineteen eighty-six, has been renewed
every five years. Eighty-five percent goes to roads and bridges,
fifteen percent to county capital improvements. In January twenty twenty-six,
commissioners approved a resolution to change the next renewal from
five years to ten. The logic is that grant timelines
have lengthened and infrastructure projects need longer planning horizons. This
goes to voters in April twenty twenty-six. If it fails,
the county loses its primary funding mechanism for road and
bridge work. The city has launched housing incentive programs that
didn't exist before — the five-thousand-dollar per unit developer reimbursement
represents a shift toward actively subsidizing new construction. And the
downtown revitalization push marks a deliberate strategic pivot. Jefferson Matters
won the twenty twenty-five Great American Main Street Award. The
conference center and hotel project was approved. The River Market
is under construction. These represent a conscious decision to invest
in downtown as an economic engine rather than continuing to
let development sprawl outward. Chapter seven. The Big Projects Coming.
Looking ahead at the next five to seven years, here's
what's in the pipeline. The downtown conference center is probably
the biggest economic bet the city has made in years.
It's a hundred eighty-nine thousand four hundred twenty square feet
of mixed-use space including a conference center, a two hundred
room full-service hotel, a grand ballroom, restaurant, coffee shop, and
five hundred twenty-six parking spaces. It's located between Madison and
Monroe streets on East Capitol Avenue. The projected economic impact
is five hundred eighty-four million dollars over a decade, supporting
three hundred seventy-two jobs and generating fourteen million in local
tax revenue. Construction starts in twenty twenty-six with completion expected
around twenty twenty-eight. The River Market project is transforming the
historic riverfront near the Missouri State Penitentiary site into a
community gathering space. Summer twenty twenty-six is the target completion.
The Jefferson City Memorial Airport is getting a new control
tower — an eight point seven million dollar project funded
through congressional appropriations, F-A-A grants, and city and state contributions.
It should be done by late fall twenty twenty-six. The
Capital Area Rail Terminal, or CART, is a multimodal transload
facility in Algoa Industrial Park, funded by two point two
million in state and federal grants. It's an industrial rail
spur extension that could open new economic development possibilities. Cole
County's five-year capital program includes roughly fifty projects with an
estimated ninety million dollar investment in roads, bridges, traffic, and
street infrastructure. And the Missouri State Penitentiary redevelopment remains a
long-term opportunity — twenty-three acres of strategically located land blending
historical preservation with modern development. Chapter eight. How to Stay
Informed. So how do you actually keep up with all
of this? City council meetings happen on the first and
third Mondays at six P-M. You can attend in person
at the Christy Municipal Building on McCarty Street, or watch
the video recordings posted on the city's website. Agendas are
published in advance. County commission meetings are every Tuesday at
nine A-M. The county posts agendas and meeting videos through
its agenda center at cole county dot org. The school
board meets monthly. Documents are available through Board Docs on
the JCPS website. For news coverage, the Jefferson City News
Tribune is the most consistent source for local government reporting.
A-B-C seventeen and K-R-C-G also cover major local stories. The
key is filtering for genuinely local coverage versus state politics
stories that just happen to have a Jefferson City dateline.
You can sign up for city alerts through the official
website and for county notifications through the Notify Me system
on cole county dot org. And pay attention to what's
coming up. The April twenty twenty-six election is consequential. Five
city council seats, three school board seats, and the county
capital improvement sales tax renewal are all on the ballot.
These decisions will shape how the city and county operate
for years. Chapter nine. The Interconnected Picture. Here's what makes
all of this interesting when you step back. These issues
aren't independent — they compound and interact. The tornado destroyed
housing, which deepened a housing crisis, which drove up rents,
which worsened affordability. Aging infrastructure led to deferred maintenance, which
led to emergency repairs like the viaduct, which created budget
pressure. COVID stimulus funds papered over revenue shortfalls for a
few years, but now they're gone and revenues are tighter
than projected. The property assessment failure created inequitable tax burdens,
which erodes public trust, which makes it harder to pass
tax renewals. And the downtown investment in the conference center
and river market could generate real revenue — but that
depends on solving the housing shortage and infrastructure backlog first.
Understanding these dynamics is what makes the difference between passively
hearing the news and actually understanding what's happening in the
place where you live. That's our deep dive for today.
This project is going to be ongoing — we've set
up a weekly monitoring system that checks city council agendas,
county commission actions, school board news, and local reporting every
Monday. So as things develop, we'll be tracking them. Thanks
for listening. This is Jacob's Daily Briefing.